Database
With the growth of the user base, one server is not enough, and we need multiple servers: one for web/mobile traffic, the other for the database (Figure 1-3). Separating web/mobile traffic (web tier) and database (data tier) servers allows them to be scaled independently.
Which databases to use?
You can choose between a traditional relational database and a non-relational database. Let us examine their differences.
Relational databases are also called a relational database management system (RDBMS) or SQL database. The most popular ones are MySQL, Oracle database, PostgreSQL, etc. Relational databases represent and store data in tables and rows. You can perform join operations using SQL across different database tables.
Non-Relational databases are also called NoSQL databases. Popular ones are CouchDB, Neo4j, Cassandra, HBase, Amazon DynamoDB, etc. [2]. These databases are grouped into four categories: key-value stores, graph stores, column stores, and document stores. Join operations are generally not supported in non-relational databases.
For most developers, relational databases are the best option because they have been around for over 40 years and historically, they have worked well. However, if relational databases are not suitable for your specific use cases, it is critical to explore beyond relational databases. Non-relational databases might be the right choice if:
• Your application requires super-low latency.
• Your data are unstructured, or you do not have any relational data.
• You only need to serialize and deserialize data (JSON, XML, YAML, etc.). • You need to store a massive amount of data.
 
Vertical scaling vs horizontal scaling
Vertical scaling, referred to as “scale up”, means the process of adding more power (CPU, RAM, etc.) to your servers. Horizontal scaling, referred to as “scale-out”, allows you to scale by adding more servers into your pool of resources.
When traffic is low, vertical scaling is a great option, and the simplicity of vertical scaling is its main advantage. Unfortunately, it comes with serious limitations.
• Vertical scaling has a hard limit. It is impossible to add unlimited CPU and memory to a single server.
• Vertical scaling does not have failover and redundancy. If one server goes down, the website/app goes down with it completely.
Horizontal scaling is more desirable for large scale applications due to the limitations of vertical scaling.
In the previous design, users are connected to the web server directly. Users will unable to access the website if the web server is offline. In another scenario, if many users access the web server simultaneously and it reaches the web server’s load limit, users generally experience slower response or fail to connect to the server. A load balancer is the best technique to address these problems.

Load balancer
A load balancer evenly distributes incoming traffic among web servers that are defined in a load-balanced set. Figure 1-4 shows how a load balancer works.
As shown in Figure 1-4, users connect to the public IP of the load balancer directly. With this setup, web servers are unreachable directly by clients anymore. For better security, private IPs are used for communication between servers. A private IP is an IP address reachable only between servers in the same network; however, it is unreachable over the internet. The load balancer communicates with web servers through private IPs.
In Figure 1-4, after a load balancer and a second web server are added, we successfully solved no failover issue and improved the availability of the web tier. Details are explained below:
• If server 1 goes offline, all the traffic will be routed to server 2. This prevents the website from going offline. We will also add a new healthy web server to the server pool to balance the load.
• If the website traffic grows rapidly, and two servers are not enough to handle the traffic, the load balancer can handle this problem gracefully. You only need to add more servers to the web server pool, and the load balancer automatically starts to send requests to them.
Now the web tier looks good, what about the data tier? The current design has one database,
 
so it does not support failover and redundancy. Database replication is a common technique to address those problems. Let us take a look.
Cache
A cache is a temporary storage area that stores the result of expensive responses or frequently accessed data in memory so that subsequent requests are served more quickly. As illustrated in Figure 1-6, every time a new web page loads, one or more database calls are executed to fetch data. The application performance is greatly affected by calling the database repeatedly. The cache can mitigate this problem.
Cache tier
The cache tier is a temporary data store layer, much faster than the database. The benefits of having a separate cache tier include better system performance, ability to reduce database workloads, and the ability to scale the cache tier independently. Figure 1-7 shows a possible setup of a cache server:
After receiving a request, a web server first checks if the cache has the available response. If it has, it sends data back to the client. If not, it queries the database, stores the response in cache, and sends it back to the client. This caching strategy is called a read-through cache. Other caching strategies are available depending on the data type, size, and access patterns. A previous study explains how different caching strategies work [6].
Interacting with cache servers is simple because most cache servers provide APIs for common programming languages. The following code snippet shows typical Memcached APIs:
Considerations for using cache
Here are a few considerations for using a cache system:
• Decide when to use cache. Consider using cache when data is read frequently but modified infrequently. Since cached data is stored in volatile memory, a cache server is not ideal for persisting data. For instance, if a cache server restarts, all the data in memory is lost. Thus, important data should be saved in persistent data stores.
• Expiration policy. It is a good practice to implement an expiration policy. Once cached data is expired, it is removed from the cache. When there is no expiration policy, cached data will be stored in the memory permanently. It is advisable not to make the expiration date too short as this will cause the system to reload data from the database too frequently. Meanwhile, it is advisable not to make the expiration date too long as the data can become stale.
• Consistency: This involves keeping the data store and the cache in sync. Inconsistency can happen because data-modifying operations on the data store and cache are not in a single transaction. When scaling across multiple regions, maintaining consistency between
  
the data store and cache is challenging. For further details, refer to the paper titled “Scaling Memcache at Facebook” published by Facebook [7].
• Mitigating failures: A single cache server represents a potential single point of failure (SPOF), defined in Wikipedia as follows: “A single point of failure (SPOF) is a part of a system that, if it fails, will stop the entire system from working” [8]. As a result, multiple cache servers across different data centers are recommended to avoid SPOF. Another recommended approach is to overprovision the required memory by certain percentages. This provides a buffer as the memory usage increases.
• Eviction Policy: Once the cache is full, any requests to add items to the cache might cause existing items to be removed. This is called cache eviction. Least-recently-used (LRU) is the most popular cache eviction policy. Other eviction policies, such as the Least Frequently Used (LFU) or First in First Out (FIFO), can be adopted to satisfy different use cases.
 
Content delivery network (CDN)
A CDN is a network of geographically dispersed servers used to deliver static content. CDN servers cache static content like images, videos, CSS, JavaScript files, etc.
Dynamic content caching is a relatively new concept and beyond the scope of this book. It enables the caching of HTML pages that are based on request path, query strings, cookies, and request headers. Refer to the article mentioned in reference material [9] for more about this. This book focuses on how to use CDN to cache static content.
Here is how CDN works at the high-level: when a user visits a website, a CDN server closest to the user will deliver static content. Intuitively, the further users are from CDN servers, the slower the website loads. For example, if CDN servers are in San Francisco, users in Los Angeles will get content faster than users in Europe. Figure 1-9 is a great example that shows how CDN improves load time.
Figure 1-10 demonstrates the CDN workflow.
  1. User A tries to get image.png by using an image URL. The URL’s domain is provided by the CDN provider. The following two image URLs are samples used to demonstrate what image URLs look like on Amazon and Akamai CDNs:
• https://mysite.cloudfront.net/logo.jpg
• https://mysite.akamai.com/image-manager/img/logo.jpg
2. If the CDN server does not have image.png in the cache, the CDN server requests the file from the origin, which can be a web server or online storage like Amazon S3.
3. The origin returns image.png to the CDN server, which includes optional HTTP header Time-to-Live (TTL) which describes how long the image is cached.

4. The CDN caches the image and returns it to User A. The image remains cached in the CDN until the TTL expires.
5. User B sends a request to get the same image.
6. The image is returned from the cache as long as the TTL has not expired.
Considerations of using a CDN
• Cost: CDNs are run by third-party providers, and you are charged for data transfers in and out of the CDN. Caching infrequently used assets provides no significant benefits so you should consider moving them out of the CDN.
• Setting an appropriate cache expiry: For time-sensitive content, setting a cache expiry time is important. The cache expiry time should neither be too long nor too short. If it is too long, the content might no longer be fresh. If it is too short, it can cause repeat reloading of content from origin servers to the CDN.
• CDN fallback: You should consider how your website/application copes with CDN failure. If there is a temporary CDN outage, clients should be able to detect the problem and request resources from the origin.
• Invalidating files: You can remove a file from the CDN before it expires by performing one of the following operations:
• Invalidate the CDN object using APIs provided by CDN vendors.
• Use object versioning to serve a different version of the object. To version an object, you can add a parameter to the URL, such as a version number. For example, version number 2 is added to the query string: image.png?v=2.
Figure 1-11 shows the design after the CDN and cache are added.

 1. Static assets (JS, CSS, images, etc.,) are no longer served by web servers. They are fetched from the CDN for better performance.
2. The database load is lightened by caching data.

Stateless web tier
Now it is time to consider scaling the web tier horizontally. For this, we need to move state (for instance user session data) out of the web tier. A good practice is to store session data in the persistent storage such as relational database or NoSQL. Each web server in the cluster can access state data from databases. This is called stateless web tier.
Stateful architecture
A stateful server and stateless server has some key differences. A stateful server remembers client data (state) from one request to the next. A stateless server keeps no state information.
Figure 1-12 shows an example of a stateful architecture.
In Figure 1-12, user A’s session data and profile image are stored in Server 1. To authenticate User A, HTTP requests must be routed to Server 1. If a request is sent to other servers like Server 2, authentication would fail because Server 2 does not contain User A’s session data. Similarly, all HTTP requests from User B must be routed to Server 2; all requests from User C must be sent to Server 3.
The issue is that every request from the same client must be routed to the same server. This can be done with sticky sessions in most load balancers [10]; however, this adds the overhead. Adding or removing servers is much more difficult with this approach. It is also challenging to handle server failures.
Stateless architecture
Figure 1-13 shows the stateless architecture.
 
 In this stateless architecture, HTTP requests from users can be sent to any web servers, which fetch state data from a shared data store. State data is stored in a shared data store and kept out of web servers. A stateless system is simpler, more robust, and scalable.
Figure 1-14 shows the updated design with a stateless web tier.